#R coding standards
1. Use text files.
2. Indent your code.
3. Limit the width of your code
4. Limit the length of individual functions

#Markdown
I've been taking notes using mark down :-)

- New lines: require a double space after the end of a line

```
First line
Second line
#output
First line Second line
```

Notice that there are 2 spaces after the end of 'First line'

```
First line  
Second line
#Output
First line
Second line
```

#R markdown
- Allows to create documents containing "live" R code
- Has the .rmd extension
- R code is evaluated as part of the processing of the markdown
- Results from R code are inserted into markdown document
- A code tool in **literate statistical programming**

- R markdown can be converted to standard markdown using the **knitr** package
  in R
- Markdown can be converted to HTML using the **markdown** package in R
- Any text editor can be used to create a markdown document; no special editing
  tools needed
- The R markdown -> mardown -> HTML work flow can be easily managed using
  R studio (but not required)
- Slides can be created using the **slidify** package.

#knitr
Literate statistcial programing
- Original idea comes from Don Knuth
- An article is a strean of text and code.
- Analysis code is divided into text and code 'chunks'
- Presentation code formats results (tables, figures, etc)
- Article text explains what is going on
- Literate programs are **weaved** to produce human-readable documents and
  **tangled** to produce machine readable documents.

Literate programming is a general concept. We need
- A documentation language
- A programming language

**Sweave** by Friedich Leisch used LaTeX and R, **knitr** supports a variety of
documentation languages.

####How do I make my work reproducible?
- Decide to do it (ideally from the start)
- Keep track of things, perhaps with a version control system to track
  snapshots/changes
- Use software whose operation can be coded
- Don't save output
- Save data in non-propietary formats.

####Literate programmin: pros
- Text and code all in one place, logical order
- Data, results automatically updated to reflect external changes
- Code is live--automatic "regression test" when building a document.

####Literate programmin: cons
- Text and code all in one place; can make documents difficult to read,
  especially if there is a lot of code.
- Can substatially slow down processing of documents (although there are tools
  to help)

##What's knitr?
- An R package available on CRAN
- Supports Markdown, LaTeX, HTML
- Exports to PDF, HTML (we can use pandoc)
- RStudio ships with it.

##Requirements
- A recent version of R
- A text editor
- Some support packages also on CRAN
- Familiarity with LaTeX, Markdown, HTML

##What's knitr good for?
- manuals
- short/medium length technical documents
- tutorials
- reports (esp. if generated periodically)
- Data preprocessing documents/summaries

###Not good for
- Very long research articles
- Complex time-consuming computations
- Documents that require precise formatting.

##Using RStudio
Press the button :-)

##Not using RStudio
```R
library(knitr)
setwd('<whatever>')
knit2html('document.Rmd')
browseURL('document.html')
```

##Processing of knitr
- You write .Rmd
- knitr generated the .md file
- knitr converts the .md to .html
- .Rmd -> .md -> .html

In the following example we are adding the `echo=FALSE` param, which indicates
that we don't want the code to show but only the output. Also notice that
addingn the param `results="hide"` will hide the output from the report.

**Note**: I'm using a period after the end back ticks to markdown doesn't think
it's the end of the clode block.

```markdown
```{r simulation,echo=FALSE,results="hide"}
set.seed(1)
x <- rnorm(100)
mean(x)
```.
```

It's also possible to add computation (or R variabled) in the middle of a text
block using the `r variable` format.

```markdown
x comes from the previous block.
This is text where `r x` will appear.
#Output: This is text where 0.2345 will appear.
```

####Plots
The images generated are base64 encoded and embeded in the HTML document,
this means that the HTML has all the information that it needs to render. No
need to worry about sending the HTML plus any other document (images, css,
etc.)

The following example, generated a plot which will be embeded in the HTML, we
can set some formatting option like in this case `fig.height=4` which renders
the plot in a rectangular way. Notice that there's also a 'tag' `{r
simulateddata}` that I don't knwo what it is about.

```markdown
```{r simulatedata, echo=TRUE}
x <- rnorm(100)
y <- x + rnorm(100, sd=0.5)
```.

some text
```{r scatterplot, fig.height=4}
par(mar=c(5, 4, 1, 1), las=1)
plot(x, y, main='My Simulated Data')
```.
```

###Pretty tables with `xtable`
`xtable` will need to be installed. In this example, it outputs a beautiful
HTML table with the summary of lm. The attribute `results='asis'` will print
the output as is, meaning there won't be any processing by knitr.

```markdown
```{r fitmodel}
library(datasets)
data(airquality)
fit <- lm(Ozone ~ Wind + Temp + Solar.R, data=airquality)
```.

here's a table of regfression coeff, in HTML!
```{r showtable, results="asis"}
library(xtable)
xt <- xtable(summary(fit))
print(xt, type='html')
```.
```

##Setting global options.
Sometimes we want that most of our code chunks are not displayed in the output.
We can avoid adding the `echo=FALSE` to all code chunk, instead we can specify
a global option.

We do that in the following example.

```markdown
```{r setoptions,echo=FALSE}
opts_chunk$set(echo=FALSE, results="hide")
```.
We override just by adding the default.

```{r fitmodel, echo=TRUE}
library(datasets)
data(airquality)
fit <- lm(Ozone ~ Wind + Temp + Solar.R, data=airquality)
```.

The code of the next chunk won't be displayed. The output will.
```{r showtable, results="asis"}
library(xtable)
xt <- xtable(summary(fit))
print(xt, type='html')
```.
```

####Some common options
- output
 - results: `'asis'`, `'hide'`
 - echo: `TRUE`, `FALSE`
- figures
 - `fig.height`: numeric
 - `fig.width`: numeric

##Caching computations
Sometimes certain chunks can take a long time, having to wait for this to
happen everytime you re-knit the document can be burdensome. We can cache some
of the chunk computation using the `cache=TRUE` attribute. After the first run,
results are loaded from cache.

One importan thing is that, if there are chunks that depend on another chunks,
changes in the former chunk aren't reflected in the latter, so, we'll need to
keep track of that. So, if the former chunk has changes it'll be re-evaluated,
if the latter doesn't, nothing happens.

Chunks with *significant side effects* may not be cached.
