#Principles of analytic graphics
- Basic principles for building analytics graphics
- Telling a story about the data.
- Edward Tufte: Beautiful evidence

1. Show comparisons
- Evidence for a hypothesis is always relative to another competing hypothesis.
  *Evidence is always relative*
 - If you have hypothesis A there has to be some alternative hypothesis that
   you're going to compare it to.
- Always ask *"Compared to what?"*
- There's an example in the lecture about air cleaners and the amount of
  symptom free days in kids with asthma. The study show that there's an
improvement when using air filters, the question now is *compared to what* and
the study compares the improvement to doing nothing (control set), no air filter
in the child house.
2. Show causality, mechanism, explanation, systematic structure.
- What is your causal framework for thinking about a question?
- Need to be able to show how we believe the system operated, how the world
  works.
- In the example before we saw that there was an improvement when no air filter
  exists, the question is why? We can show that the particulate matter is
reduced when a filter is present, in this way we are explaining why the air
filter is better. This will require much more investigation of course.
3. Show multivariate data
- Multivariate: more than 2 variables
- The real world is multivariate
- Need to *"escape flatland"*:  Simpson's paradox?
- **Show as much data on a single plot as you can.**
4. Integration of evidence.
- Completely integrate words, numbers, images, diagrams
- Data graphics should make use of many modes of data presentation: Should be
  able to combine different modes of evidence into a single presentation to
  make it as information rich as possible. If you have a tools that makes a plot,
  to only show a plot; only having the ability to make a table, only make a table.
  We should use as many ways as possible.
- Don't let the tool drive the analysis: 
- Use as many modes of evidence, or displaying evidence as you can.
5. Describe and document the evidence with appropriate labels, scales, sources,
   etc. 
- A data graphic should tell a complete story that is credible.
- Using R, show the code that generated the data/graph/etc.
- Where the data came from, how were the plots made are important aspects to
  *increase credibility*.
6. Content is king
- Analytical presentations ultimately stand or fall depending on the quality,
  relevance and integrity of their content.
- What's the story that I'm trying to tell? What data do I have? What's the
  best way to present that?

##Exploratory Graphs
Made mostly for our self to have a look at the data and see what's going on in
the data set, what are the properties? What are the problems? What to follow up?
*What do my data look like?*

Why graphs?
- To understand data properties
- To find patterns in data
- To suggest modeling strategies
- To "debug" analyses
- To communicate results.

###Characteristics of exploratory graphs
- They are made quickly
- A large number are made
- The goal is for personal understanding
- Axes/Legends are generally cleaned up later.
- Color/size are primarily used for information.

When looking at the data, we should have an underlying question that we're
thinking in the back of our head, no matter if it's a vague one. The question
will drive my thinking about what the data looks like.

One dimension summaries of the data (graphs):
- Five-number summary: Min, 1st Quartile, Median, 3rd Quartile and the Max).
- Boxplots
- Histograms
- Density plot
- Barplot

```R
pollution <- read.csv("data/avgpm25.csv", colClasses=c("numeric", "character",
"factor", "numeric", "numeric"))

# 5 (6 mean is added) number summary
summary(pollution$pm25)

# box plot of the data
bloxplot(pollution$pm25, col="blue")
abline(h=12) # draws a line in the level 12

# histogram of the data, green columns, setting a total of 100 breaks (columns)
hist(pollution$pm25, col="green", breaks=100)
abline(v=12, lwd=2) # adds a line in the value 12
# add a line where the median of the data set is.
abline(v=median(pollution$pm25), col="magenta", lwd=4)
# plots all of the point in the data, underneath the histogram
rug(pollution$pm25)

# barplot
barplot(table(pollution$region), col="wheat",
        main="Number of counties in each region.")

example(points) # demo of point to use in scatter diagrams
hist(x, y, pch=2) # plotting char is a triangle.
# 21-25 accept col= border color, bg=background color

title('sets the title for the graph')
test(-2, -2, 'text in coordinate -2,-2 of the graph')
# sets a legend for plot symbol 20
legen('{top,bottom}{left,right}', legend='Message', pch=20) 
fit <- lm(y ~ x)
# adds a line using the linear model with line width=4, color blue
abline(fit, lwd=4, col='blue') 

#having more than 1 plot
par(mfrow=c(2, 1)) # 2 rows, 1 column
par(mar c= c(2, 2, 1, 1)) setting margins bottom, left, top, right

# the order to draw plots when
par(mfrow=c(2, 2))
plot # pos 1,1
plot # pos 1, 2
plot # pos 2, 1
plot # pos 2, 2

# I can use mfcol
par(mfcol=c(2, 2))
plot # pos 1, 1
plot # pos 2, 1
plot # pos 1, 2
plot # pos 2, 2

# We can draw a plot with no data and then add it later
plot(x, y, type='n') # draw the plot without data
point(x[g == 'Male'], y[g == 'Male']) # Add male to the plot
# add female to the plot
point(x[g == 'Female'], y[g == 'Female'], col='blue', pch=19)
```
