#The lattice plotting system
- `library(lattice)` Trellis graphics independent of the base graphic system.
 - `xyplot`, `bwplot`, `levelplot`
- `grid`: lattice builds on top of grid, rarely `grid` functions are called.
- Plotting and annotation is done at once with a single function call.

###Lattice functions
- `xyplot` to create scatterplots
- `bwplot` boxplots
- `histogram`
- `stripplot` like a boxplot with actual plots
- `dotplot` plot dots on 'violin strings'
- `splom` scatterplot matrix; like `pairs` in base plotting system
- `levelplot`, `contourplot` for plotting 'image' data

The `xyplot(y ~ x | f * g, data)` call will have the following params.
- We use the *formula notation*, hence the `~`
- On the left of the `~` is the y-axis, and x-axis on the right.
- `f` and `g` are *conditioning variables* (optional), the * indicates
  integration between the two variables.
- `data` is the data frame where x, y, f, and g can be found. No data param then
   the parent frame (workspace) is used.
- There are defaults in place.

```R
library(lattice)
library(datasets)
xyplot(Ozone ~ Wind, data=airquality)

airquality <- transform(airquality, Month = factor(Month))
xplot(Ozone ~ Wind | Month, data = airquality, layout = c(5, 1))
```

The advantage of lattice is that these multidimensional plot can be done very
simply with just a function call. When comparing to the base plotting system
that will require many functions.

###Lattice behavior
- Base graphic system plots data directly to the graphic device (screen, file,
  etc.)
- The lattice graphic function return an object of type **trellis**
- The print methods for lattice function do the work of plotting in the graphic
  device.
- The lattice functions return a 'plot object' that can, in principle, be
  stored, but it's better to only save the code and data.
- On the command line, trellis objects are *auto-printed*, meaning we see
  a plot.

```R
p <- xyplot(Ozone ~ Wind, data = airquality) # Nothin happens
print(p) # plot appears

xyplot(Ozone ~ Wind, data = airquality) # Auto print.
```

#The lattice plotting system
Each panel is going to represent a subset of the data, which is defined by the
conditioning variable that you give it.

- lattice functions have a panel function that controls what happen in each
  panel.
- The lattice package defines defaults but we can add our own.
- The lattice system is ideal for creating conditioning plots where you examine
  the same kind of plot under many different conditions.
- Other function in the lattice package include `bwplot`,  `boxplot`,
  `scatter`.

One important thing in the following example is the way the factor are
initially created as numbers and how they are renamed later to a specific text
that will make it easy to distinguish what those initial numbers represent.

```R
set.seed(10)
x <- rnorm(100)
f <- rep(0:1, each=50)
y <- x + f - f * x + rnorm(100, sd=0.5)
f <- factor(f, labels = c('Group 1', 'Group 2'))
xyplot(y ~ x | f, layout = c(2, 1)) # Plot with 2 panels

# calling custom functions
xyplot(y ~ x | f, panel = function(x, y, ...) {
    # this will apply to each factor f.
    panel.xyplot(x, y, ...) # Render the panels
    panel.abline(h = median(y), lty=2) # horizontal dash line at the median.
}, layout=c(2, 1)) # I don't need to add the layout param since its the
                   # default behavior

xyplot(y ~ x | f, panel = function(x, y, ...) {
    panel.xyplot(x, y, ...) # renders the plots
    panel.lmline(x, y, col=2) # overlays a simple linear regression line.
})
```

#ggplot2 - Part 1
- Implementation of *Grammar of Graphics* by Leland Wilkinson
 - How graphics can be broken down into abstract concept. Allows for a "theory"
   of graphics on which to build new graphics and graphics objects.
 - Think of the grammar of English, verbs, noun, adjectives.
 - *'Shorten the distance from mind to page'*
- Written by Hadley Wickham
- Available through CRAN `install.packages("ggplot2")`
- http://ggplot2.org

An excerpt from the *ggplot2* book:
> In brief, the grammar tells us that a statistical graphic is a **mapping**
> from data to **aesthetic** attributes (color, shape, size) of **geometric**
> objects (points, lines, bars). The plot may also contain statistical
> transformations of the data and is drawn on a specific coordinate system"

###The basics: `qplot()`
- Works much like the `plot` function in the base graphic system.
- Looks for data in a data frame, similar to latice or in the parent env.
- Plots are made up of *aesthetics* (size, shape, color) and *geoms* (points,
  lines)
- *Factors* are very important for indicating subsets of the data (if they are
  to have different properties); they should be **labeled**.
- The `qplot` functions abstracts many things.
- `ggplot` is the core function and very flexible for doing things `qplot`
  can't do.

#ggplot2 - Part 2
```R
library(ggplot2)
library(datasets)
str(mpg)
# basic plot of display/hwy
qplot(displ, hwy, data=mpg)
# same plot but now the points are colored base don the drv variable
qplot(displ, hwy, data=mpg, color=drv)
# we can also change the shape of the points
qplot(displ, hwy, data=mpg, shape=drv)
# adding statistic, low s, overall trend in the data set
qplot(displ, hwy, data=mpg, geom=c('point', 'smooth'))
# adding a regression line
qplot(displ, hwy, data=mpg, geom=c('point', 'smooth'), method='lm')

# histogram
qplot(hwy, data=mpg, fill=drv)
```

###Facets
In the example above, we were plotting the different point with different color
based on the `drv` variable. Sometimes it can be difficult to look at the data
in this way and the best would be to have different plots based on the same
variable, in order to do this, we need make use of the `facet` params in `qplot`.

The `facet` params takes a specific syntax `. ~ drv` this is similar for
example, create as many rows `.` as needed for the variable `.`, in this case
`.` represents no variable, so it'll create 1 row. The `drv` would determine
how many columns will be created and this will depend on the values of `drv`
which in this case consist of `4, r, f` and thus will create 3 columns, 1 plot
for each value of `drv`.

On the other hand a `facet` like `drv ~ .` would create three rows and
1 columns. Each row will contain a plot.

```R
qplot(displ, hwy, data=mpg, facets=. ~ drv)
qplot(hwy, data=mpg, facets=drv ~ ., binwidth=2)
```

#ggplot2 - Part 3
Basic components of a ggplot2 plot
- A data frame
- aesthetic mappings: how data is mapped to color, size
- geoms: geometric objects like points, lines, shapes.
- facets: for conditional plots
- stats: statistical transformations like binning, quatiles, smoothing.
- scales: what scale an aesthetic map uses (example: male=red, female=blue)
- coordiate system: tells you how certain numerical representations get
  translated onto a plot.

- Plots are built up in layers
 - plot the data
 - overlay a summary
 - metadata and annotation.

```R
# aes = aesthetics
g <- ggplot(data, aes(x, y))
summary(g)
print(g) # wont display anything
g + geom_point() # displays a graph.
```

#ggplot2 - Part 4
####Adding more layers
Continuing with adding more layer, we are now going to add a smooth low s and
a regression line.

```R
g + geom_point() + geom_smooth()
g + geom_point() + geom_smooth(method='lm')
# adding facets, the order of the function calls doesn't matter.
g + geom_point() + face_grid(. ~ bmicat) + geom_smooth(method='lm')
``` 

####Modifying aesthetics.
We can modify the aesthetics, for example, we can change the color, size,
transparency of the dots in a plot.

The values specified in the first plot are constant, we are saying what the
values would be. In the second plot however, we are not specifying a constant
for the `color` param, we are telling ggplot that the color should be defined
based on the categories of the `bmicat` values.

```R
g + geom_point(color = 'steelblue', size = 4, alpha = 1/2)
g + geom_point(color = aes(color = bmicat), size = 4, alpha = 1/2)
```

####Modifying labels (annotation)
In the following example we make use of the `labs` function which is a generic
function that allows you to modify the labels for the x, y axis and the title
of the plot. There are however, specific functions to modify those elements
`xlab`, `ylab`, `ggtitle`.

The expression `expression('log ' * PM[2.5])` makes use of a mathematical
annotation (that I probably miss), it generates the label log PM2.5, being 2.5
a subscript.

```R
g + geom_point(aes(color = bmicat))
  + labs(title = 'MAACS Cohort')
  + labs(x = expression('log ' * PM[2.5], y = 'Nocturnal Symptoms')
```

####Customizing the Smooth
Params used in `geom_smooth` function.
- size: the size of the line
- linetype: type of the line (3 = dotted)
- method: still using the regression line.
- se: confidence intervals (turned off)

```R
g + geom_point(color = aes(color = bmicat), size = 2, alpha = 1/2)
  + geom_smooth(size = 4, linetype = 3, method = 'lm', se = F)
```

####Changing the theme
Change the overall presentation of the graph, by default ggplot2 uses the gray
background theme. In the following example we use the bw theme and change the
font of the plot.

```R
g + geom_point(aes(color = bmicat))
  + theme_bw(base_family = 'Times')
```

#ggplot2 - Part 5
####Notes about axis limits
The following example starts by creating a random data with an outlier in it.
We will display the data and try to hide the outlier so we can have a look at
the rest of the data.

```R
testdat <- data.frame(x = 1:100, y = rnorm(100))
testdat[50, 2] <- 100
# With the base system
plot(testdat$x, testdat$y, type='l', ylim=c(-3, 3))
# With ggplot, display everything no range limits.
g <- gplot(testdat, aes(x = x, y = y)
g + geom_line()
```

Our initial attempt to remove the outlier from out plot would be to change the
limits of the graph the same way it was done for the base system, however, ggplot
would remove those data points that fall outside of the specified range. We
instead call the `coord_cartesian` function to include those outliers.

```R
# will take outlier out of the graph
g + geom_line()
  + ylim(-3, 3)

# will set the graph limit and draw outliers
g + geom_line()
  + coord_carterian(ylim = c(-3, 3))
```

####Slicing continuous data to generate categorical data
What to do in the cases when we want to include a continuous variable as
a conditional variable in our plots? A continuous variable would require an
infinite number of plots and wouldn't be very helpful.

The `cut` function could slice data in different sets or chunks, each being
a range (or category) of the variable.

```R
# calculate the deciles of the data
cutpoints <- quantile(maacs$logno2_new, seq(0, 1, length=4), na.rm=T)

# cut the data at the deciles and create a new factor variable
maacs$no2dec <- cut(maacs$logno2_new, cutpoints)

# see the levels of the newly created factor variable
levels(maacs$no2dec)
```

Now for the plot.
```R
# set up ggplot with data frame
g <- ggplot(maacs, aes(logpm25, NocturnalSympt))

# add layers
g
    # add points (1/3 transparency)
   + geom_point(alpha = 1/3)

    # makes the panels based on the newly created factor, bmicat will determine
    # how many rows the plot will have, in this case we know that bmicat has 2,
    # overweight, and normal weight.
    # For no2dec, we know we divided the data into 4 section, so we will have
    # 4 columns.
  + facet_wrap(bmicat ~ no2dec, nrow=2, ncol=4)

    # we add a regression line, confidence points off and color steelblue
  + geom_smooth(method = 'lm', se=F, col='steelblue')

    # change the theme to the simpler bw, change the font style and size
  + theme_bw(base_family='Avenir', base_size=10)

    # set the labels for the x&y axis.
  + labs(x = expression('log ' * PM[2.5]))
  + labs(y = 'Nocturnal Symptoms')

    # sets the main title for the plot.
  + labs(title = 'MAACS Cohort')
``` 

###Notes
```R
#relationship between ozone and wind speed varies across each month
library(datasets)
data(airquality)
airquality = transform(airquality, Month = factor(Month))
qplot(Wind, Ozone, data = airquality, facets = . ~ Month)


# a scatterplot of 'votes' and 'rating'
qplot(votes, rating, data = movies)
# add a smoother to the scatterplot
qplot(votes, rating, data = movies) + geom_smooth() 
```
