#Hierarchical clustering
- How do we define close?
- How do we group things?
- How do we visualize the grouping?
- How do we interpret the grouping?

Organizing the data in a hierarchical order.
- A bottom up approach, an agglomerative approach
 - Find closes two things
 - Put them together
 - Find the next closest
- Requires
 - A defined distance
 - A merging approach
- Produces
 - A tree showing how close things are to each other. Sometimes called
   a dendogram


###Definine close
It's importan to determine how distance is defined in a way that makes sense
to the problem that we have at hand.

- Most importan step
 - Garbage in -> Garbage out
- Distance or similarity
 - Continuous - euclidean distance. Straight line distance between 2 points.
 - Continuous - Correlation similarity
 - Binary - manhattan distance
- Pick a distance/similarity that makes sense for your problem.

#####Euclidian distance
Just take the two point and calculate the distance
between then, this is like the straigh line that exists between 2 cities.

```
Assuming that we have two points (X1, Y1) and (X2, Y2), the euclidean distance
can be defines as
sqrt( (X1-X2)^2 + (Y1-Y2)^2 )
 
For more than 2 dimensions
sqrt( (A1-A2)^2 + (B1-B2)^2 + ... + (Z1-Z2)^2 )
```

#####Manhattan distance
The MD can be seen as the distance between 2 point, but a straight line cannot
be defined (or doesn't make any sense) but a path needs to be follow, like for
example, if we are in manhattan or any other city, we may need to get to
a point by following streets, as opposed to a straight line.

Assumming that we have two point (X1, Y1) and (X2, Y2). We are calculating the
absolute value of each of the points and then adding it.

```
|X1-X2| + |Y1-Y2|
|A1-A2| + |B1-B2| + ... + |Z1-Z2|
```

####R
The `dist` function calculates the distance between the points in a data frame
and returs a matrix with the distance for each to the points.  By default the
`dist` function calculates the euclidean distance.

```R
df <- data.frame(x=x, y=x)
dist(df)
```

1. We start by locating the closes point in the data set and group them together
   and make a new point.
2. We then search for the next closes point and again, create a new point.
3. We continue doing that until we have covered all the point in the data set.

```R
# Define the x,y coordinates
set.seed(1234); par(mar=c(0,0,0,0))
x <- rnorm(12,mean=rep(1:3,each=4),sd=0.2)
y <- rnorm(12,mean=rep(c(1,2,1),each=4),sd=0.2)
df <- data.frame(x=x,y=y)

distxy <- dist(df)
hcluster <- hclust(distxy)
plot(hcluster)
```

How do you merge points together? When points are merged what is its new
location?
- Average linkage: You take 2 points and the new coordinate is the average of
  the x coordinate and the y coordinate. The center of gravity, the middle of
  those 2 points
- Complete linkage: Measuring the distance between 2 clusters of points, take
  the fartest 2 points from the cluster and that gives the linkage approach.

As can be inferred both approaches would give a very different result, so it's
worth trying both approaches.

##heatmap
Allows to visualize matrix data. If we have an extremely large table or a large
matrix of numbers that are kind of similarly scaled. This function runs
a hierarchical cluster analysis on the rows of the table and on the columns of
the table. The rows and columns can be seen as different observations.
