#Editing Texts Variables.
- `tolower`
- `toupper`
- `strsplit(x, '\\.')`: Splits `x` on the character `\\.`
```R
> strsplit(vaersdata[1, RECVDATE], '/')
[[1]]
[1] "01"   "01"   "2014"
```

- `sub`: Substitute characters once.
- `gsub`: Substitutes characters all.
```R
tex <- 'this_is_my_test'
sub('_', '', tex) # thisis_my_test
gsub('_', '', tex) # thisismytest
```

- `grep`: returns the vector position where the search string matches.
- `grepl`: grep(l)ogical, returns T or F based on the presence of the search.
```R
tex <- 'This is a good test'
grep('s', tex) # 1 because there's only 1 value/vector.
grep('s', tex, value=T) # 'This is a good test' since that's the string that
                        # matched
grepl('s', tex) # T
length(grep('z', tex)) # 0
```

####library(stringr)
- `nchar(x)`: amount of chars in a `x`
- `substr(x, start, end)`: Extracts part of `x`, based on `start`/`end`
- `paste`, `paste0(x, y)`: concatenates `x` and `y`, `paste0` no space in
  between
- `str_trim`: removes spaces around the string.

##Important points about text in data sets
- Variable names should:
 - All lower cases
 - Descriptive
 - Not duplicate
 - No underscores/dots/white spaces
- Variables with chars class
 - Try to make them factors (depends on the application)
 - Values should be descriptive, TRUE/FALSE instead of 0/1, Male/Female instead
   of (M/F))

#Regular expressions.
Allows search for a text that might fit a more broad pattern. So, it's not
about searching for specific strings, but rather, patterns in the strings.
- Metacharacters: Gramar of the language.
- Literals: words of the language

- `[Bb][Uu][Ss][Hh]` matches: Bush, bush, BUSh, etc.
- `^[0-9][a-zA-A]`, starting with eiher aA, Aa, 0a, etc.
- `[^?.]$` Not finishing with either ? or .
- `value1|value2`: matches value1, or value2 on a string.
- `^[Gg]ood|[Bb]ad`: Matches good/God at the beginning of the line (only),
  bad/Bad can be anywhere in the string (there's no `^` for bad)
- `^([Gg]ood|[Bb]ad)`: This as opposed to the previous one looks for good/Good
  or bad/Bad at the beginning of the line.
- `[Gg]eorge( [Ww]\.)? [Bb]ush`: the `?` makes the content between the `()`
  optional, the string can have it or not and it will match: 'george bush',
  'george w. bush' are matches.
- expression repetition is specified with `a{1, 5}`, this will match a, aa,
  aaaaa, but not aaaaaa which has 6 `a`s and so on.
 - `{m, n}` means at least `m`, but no more than `n`
 - `{m}` exactly `m` matches.
 - `{m,}` at least `m` matches

The parenthesis, aside from giving the ability to define the scope of
alternatives using the `|`, it can also capture the matches of expressions. And
refer to those with `\1`, `\2`.

```regexp
# Basically, 1 space,
# follow by a string of 1+ characters, capture the match (1)
# followed by 1 space
# followed by the previously matched string (1)
# followed by 1 space.
 +([a-zA-Z]+) +\1 +
# example, "I'm so so happy this is very clear"
```

The `*` is 'greedy' it'll take as many characters as it can. For example
`^s(.*)s` will take as many character that finish with s, however `^s(.*?)s`
how and to what extent? I don't know.

#Working with dates
- `date`: Return todays date (and time) in a character format.
- `Sys.Date`: Returns todays date in a date type
- `format`: formats a date type in the specified order.
- `as.Date`: transform the value to a date, we can specify the format of the
  date in the character.
- `weekdays`: day of the week
- `months`: month name
- `Sys.timezone()`: gets the system timezone

```R
d <- date()
d # Thu Oct  1 23:11:55 2015
class(d) # character

d2 <- Sys.Date()
d2 # "2015-10-01"
class(d2) # "Date"

# %a abbreviated weekday
# %b abbreviated month
# %d day
format(d2, '%a %b %d') # Thu Oct 01

x <- c('1dec2013', '2dec2014')
y <- as.Date(x, '%d%b%Y') # y has dates now
weekdays(y[2]) # "Tuesday"
months(y[2]) # "December"
```

####lubridate
```R
library(lubridate)
ymd('20140201') # 2014-01-01
mdy('02-01-2014') # same
mdy('02/01/2014') # same
mdy('02.01.2014') # same
dmy('01/02/2014') # same

lapply(x, dmy) # yes we get y as before

ymd_hms('2015-10-01 11:31:00') # parsed to what's expected
ymd_hms('2015-10-01 11:31:00', tz='some tz')

wday(somedate) # 0, 1, 2, 3, etc
wday(somedate, label=T) # sunday, monday, etc
```
